THE EMPIRE OF THE ANTS


1.

When Captain Gerilleau received instructions to take his new gunboat,
the Benjamin Constant, to Badama on the Batemo arm of the Guaramadema
and there assist the inhabitants against a plague of ants, he suspected
the authorities of mockery. His promotion had been romantic and
irregular, the affections of a prominent Brazilian lady and the
captain's liquid eyes had played a part in the process, and the Diario
and O Futuro had been lamentably disrespectful in their comments. He
felt he was to give further occasion for disrespect.

He was a Creole, his conceptions of etiquette and discipline were
pure-blooded Portuguese, and it was only to Holroyd, the Lancashire
engineer, who had come over with the boat, and as an exercise in the use
of English--his "th" sounds were very uncertain--that he opened his
heart.

"It is in effect," he said, "to make me absurd! What can a man do
against ants? Dey come, dey go."

"They say," said Holroyd, "that these don't go. That chap you said was a
Sambo--"

"Zambo--it is a sort of mixture of blood."

"Sambo. He said the people are going!"

The captain smoked fretfully for a time. "Dese things 'ave to happen,"
he said at last. "What is it? Plagues of ants and suchlike as God wills.
Dere was a plague in Trinidad--the like ants that carry leaves. Orl der
oranges-trees, all der mangoes! What does it matter? Sometimes ant
armies come into your houses--fighting ants; a different sort. You go
and they clean the house. Then you come back again;--the house is clean,
like new! No cockroaches, no fleas, no jiggers in the floor."

"That Sambo chap," said Holroyd, "says these are a different sort of
ant."

The captain shrugged his shoulders, fumed, and gave his attention to a
cigarette.

Afterwards he reopened the subject. "My dear 'Olroyd, what am I to do
about des infernal ants?"

The captain reflected. "It is ridiculous," he said. But in the afternoon
he put on his full uniform and went ashore, and jars and boxes came back
to the ship and subsequently he did. And Holroyd sat on deck in evening
coolness and smoked profoundly and marvelled at Brazil. They were six
days up the Amazon, some hundreds of miles from the ocean, and east and
west of him there was horizon like the sea, and to the south nothing but
a sand-bank island with some tufts of scrub. The water was always
running like a sluice, thick with dirt, animated with crocodiles and
hovering birds, and fed by some inexhaustible source of tree trunks; and
the waste of it, the headlong waste of it, filled his soul. The town of
Alemquer, with its meagre church, its thatched sheds for houses, its
discoloured ruins of ampler days, seemed a little thing lost in this
wilderness of Nature, a sixpence dropped on Sahara. He was a young man,
this was his first site of the tropics, he came straight from England,
where Nature is hedged, ditched, and drained into the perfection of
submission, and he had suddenly discovered the insignificance of man.
For six days they had been steaming up the sea by unfrequented channels,
and man had been as rare as a rare butterfly. One saw one day a canoe,
another day a distant station, the next no men at all. He began to
perceive that man is indeed a rare animal, having but a precarious hold
upon this land.

He perceived it more clearly as the days passed, and he made his devious
way to the Batemo, in the company of this remarkable commander, who
ruled over one big gun, and was forbidden to waste his ammunition.
Holroyd was learning Spanish industriously, but he was still in the
present tense and substantive stage of speech, and the only other person
who had any words of English was a negro stoker, who had them all wrong.
The second in command was a Portuguese, da Cunha, who spoke French, but
it was a different sort of French from the French Holroyd had learned in
Southport, and their intercourse was confined to politenesses and simple
propositions about weather. And the weather, like everything else in
this amazing new world, the weather had no human aspect, and was hot by
night and hot by day, and the air steam, even the wind was hot steam,
smelling of vegetation in decay: and the alligators and the strange
birds, the flies of many sorts and sizes, the beetles, the ants, the
snakes and monkeys seemed to wonder what man was doing in an atmosphere
that had no gladness in its sunshine and no coolness in its night. To
wear clothing was intolerable, but to cast it aside was to scorch by
day, and expose an ampler area to the mosquitoes by night; to go on deck
by day was to be blinded by glare and to stay below was to suffocate.
And in the daytime came certain flies, extremely clever and noxious
about one's wrist and ankle. Captain Gerilleau, who was Holroyd's sole
distraction from these physical distresses, developed into a formidable
bore, telling the simple story of his heart's affections day by day, a
string of anonymous women, as if he was telling beads. Sometimes he
suggested sport, and they shot at alligators, and at rare intervals they
came to human aggregations in the waste of trees, and stayed for a day
or so, and drank and sat about; and one night, danced with Creole girls,
who found Holroyd's poor elements of Spanish, without either past tense
or future, amply sufficient for their purposes. But these were mere
luminous chinks in the long grey passage of the streaming river, up
which the throbbing engines beat. A certain liberal heathen deity, in
the shape of demi-john, held seductive court aft, and it is probable,
forward.

But Gerilleau learned things about the ants, more things and more, at
this stopping-place and that, and became interested in his mission.

"Dey are a new sort of ant," he said. "We have got to be--what do you
call it--? Entomologie? Big. Five centimetres! Some bigger! It is
ridiculous. We are like monkeys--sent to pick insects... But dey are
eating up the country."

He burst out indignantly. "Suppose--suddenly, there are complications
with Europe. Here am I--soon we shall be above the Rio Negro--and my gun,
useless!"

He nursed his knee and mused.

"Dose people who were dere at de dancing place, dey 'ave come down. Dey
'ave lost all they got. De ants come to deir house one afternoon.
Everyone run out. You know when de ants come one must--every one runs
out and they go over the house. If you stayed they'd eat you. See? Well,
presently dey go back; dey say, 'The ants 'ave gone...' De ants 'aven't
gone. Dey try to go in--de son, 'e gose in. De ants fight."

"Swarm over him?"

"Bite 'im. Presently he comes out again--screaming and running. He runs
past them to river. See? He get into de water and drowns de ants--yes."
Gerilleau paused, brought his liquid eyes close to Holroyd's face,
tapped Holroyd's knee with his knuckle. "That night he dies, just as if
he was stung by snake."

"Poisoned--by the ants?"

"Who knows?" Gerilleau shrugged his shoulders. "Perhaps they bit him
badly... When I joined dis service I joined to fight men. Dese things,
dese ants, dey come and go. It is no business for men."

After that he talked frequently of ants to Holroyd, and whenever they
chanced to drift against any speck of humanity in that waste of water
and sunshine and distant trees, Holroyd's improving knowledge of the
language enabled him to recognise the ascendant word Sauba, more and
more completely dominating the whole.

He perceived the ants were becoming interesting, and the nearer he drew
to them the more interesting they became. Gerilleau abandoned his old
themes almost suddenly, and the Portuguese lieutenant became a
conversational figure; he knew something about the leaf-cutting ant, and
expanded his knowledge. Gerilleau sometimes rendered what he had to tell
to Holroyd. He told of the little workers that swarm and fight, and the
big workers that command and rule, and how these latter always crawled
to the neck and how their bites drew blood. He told how they cut leaves
and made fungus beds, and how their nests in Caracas are sometimes a
hundred yards across. Two days the three men spent disputing whether
ants have eyes. The discussion grew dangerously heated on the second
afternoon, and Holroyd saved the situation by going ashore in a boat to
catch ants and see. He captured various specimens and returned and some
had eyes and some hadn't. Also, they argued, do ants bite or sting?

"Dese ants," said Gerilleau, after collecting information at a rancho,
"have big eyes. They don't run about blind--not as most ants do. No! Dey
get in corners and watch what you do."

"And they sting?" asked Holroyd.

"Yes. Dey sting. Dere is poison in the sting." He meditated. "I do not
see what men can do against ants. Dey come and go."

"But these don't go."

"They will," said Gerilleau.

Past Tamandu there is a long low coast of eighty miles without any
population, and then ones comes to the confluence of the main river and
the Batemo arm, like a great lake, and then the forest came nearer, came
at last intimately near. The character of the channel changes, snags
abound, and the Benjamin Constant moored by a cable that night, under
the very shadow of dark trees. For the first time for many days came a
spell of coolness, and Holroyd and Gerilleau sat late, smoking cigars
and enjoying this delicious sensation. Gerilleau's mind was full of ants
and what they could do. He decided to sleep at last, and lay down on a
mattress on deck, a man hopelessly perplexed; his last words, when he
already seemed asleep, were to ask, with a flourish of despair: "What
can one do with ants...? De whole thing is absurd."

Holroyd was left to scratch his bitten wrists, and meditate alone.

He sat on the bulwark and listened to changes in Gerilleau's breathing
until he was fast asleep, and then the ripple and lap of stream took his
mind, and brought back that sense of immensity that had been growing
upon him since first he had left Para and come up the river. The monitor
showed but one small light, and there was first a little talking forward
and then stillness. His eyes went from the dim black outlines of the
middle works of the gunboat towards the bank, to the black overwhelming
mysteries of forest, lit now and then by a fire-fly, and never still
from the murmur of alien and mysterious activities...

It was the inhuman immensity of this land that astonished and oppressed
him. He knew the skies were empty of men, the stars were specks in an
incredible vastness of space; he knew the ocean was enormous and
untamable, but in England he had come to think of the land as man's. In
England it is indeed man's, the wild things live by sufferance, grow on
lease, everywhere the roads, the fences, and absolute security runs. In
an atlas, too, the land is man's, and all coloured to show his claim to
it--in vivid contrast to the universal independent blueness of the sea.
He had taken it for granted that a day would come when everywhere about
the earth, plough and culture, light tramways, and good roads, an
ordered security, would prevail. But now he doubted.

This forest was interminable, it had an air of being invincible, and Man
seemed at best an infrequent precarious intruder. One travelled for
miles amidst the still silent struggle of giant trees, of strangulating
creepers, of assertive flowers, everywhere the alligator, the turtle,
and endless varieties of bird and insects seemed at home, dwelt
irreplaceable--but man, man at most held a footing upon resentful
clearings, fought weeds, fought beasts and insects for the barest
foothold, fell a prey to snake and beast, insects and fever, and was
presently carried away. In many places down the river he had been
manifestly driven back, this deserted creek or that preserved the name
of a casa, and here and there ruinous white walls and shattered towers
enforced the lesson. The puma, the jaguar, were more the masters here...

Who are the real masters?

In a few miles of this forest there must be more ants than there are men
in the world! This seemed to Holroyd a perfectly new idea. In a few
thousand years men had emerged from barbarism to a stage of civilisation
that made them feel lords of the future and masters of earth! But what
was to prevent ants evolving also? Such ants as one knew lived in little
communities of a few thousand individuals, made no concerted efforts
against the greater world. But they had a language, they had an
intelligence! Why should things stop at that any more then men had
stopped at the barbaric stage? Suppose presently the ants began to store
knowledge, just as men had done by means of books and records, use
weapons, form great empires, sustain a planned and organised war?

Things came back to him that Gerilleau had gathered about these ants
they were approaching. They used a poison like the poison of snakes.
They obeyed greater leaders even as the leaf-cutting ants do. They were
carnivorous, and where they came they stayed...

The forest was very still. The water lapped incessantly against the
side. About the lantern overhead there eddied a noiseless whirl of
phantom moths.

Gerilleau stirred in the darkness and sighed. "What can one do?" he
murmured, and turned over and was still again.

Holroyd was roused from meditations that were becoming sinister by the
hum of a mosquito.


2.

The next morning Holroyd learned they were within forty kilometers of
Badama, and his interest in the banks intensified. He came up whenever
an opportunity offered to examine his surroundings. He could see no
signs of human occupation whatever, save for a weedy ruin of a house and
green-stained facade of the long-deserted monastery at Moju, with a
forest tree growing out of a vacant window space, and great creepers
netted across its vacant portals. Several flights of strange yellow
butterflies with semi-transparent wings crossed the river that morning,
and many alighted on the monitor and were killed by men. It was towards
afternoon that they came upon the derelict cuberta.

She did not at first appear to be derelict; both her sails were set and
hanging slack in the afternoon calm, and there was the figure of a man
sitting on the fore planking beside the shipped sweeps. Another man
appeared to be sleeping face downwards on the sort of longitudinal
bridge, these big canoes have in the waist. But it was presently
apparent, from the sway of her rudder and the way she drifted into the
course of the gunboat, that something was out of order with her.
Gerilleau surveyed her through a field-glass, and became interested in
queer darkness of the face of the sitting man, a red-faced man he
seemed, without a nose--crouching he was rather than sitting, and the
longer the captain looked the less he liked to look at him, and the less
able he was to take his glasses away.

But he did so at last, and went a little way to call up Holroyd. Then he
went back to hail the cuberta. He hailed her again, and so she drove
past him. Santa Rosa stood out clearly as her name.

As she came by and into the wake of the monitor, she pitched a little,
and suddenly the figure of the crouching man collapsed as though all
it's joints had given way. His hat fell off, his head was not nice to
look at, and his body flopped lax and rolled out of sight behind the
bulwarks.

"Caramba!" cried Gerilleau, and resorted to Holroyd forthwith.

Holroyd was halfway up the companion. "Did you see dat?" said the
captain.

"Dead!" said Holroyd. "Yes. You'd better send a boat aboard. There's
something wrong."

"Did you--by any chance--see his face?"

"What was it like?"

"It was--ugh--! I have no words." And the captain suddenly turned his
back on Holroyd and became a active and strident commander.

The gunboat came about, steamed parallel to the erratic course of the
canoe, and dropped the boat with Lieutenant da Cunha and three sailors
to board her. Then the curiosity of the captain made him draw up almost
alongside as the lieutenant got aboard, so that the whole of the Santa
Rosa deck and hold, was visible to Holroyd.

He saw now clearly that the sole crew of the vessel was these two dead
men, and though he could not see their faces, he saw by their
outstretched hands, which were all of ragged flesh, that they had been
subjected to some strange exceptional process of decay. For a moment his
attention, concentrated on these two enigmatical bundles of dirty cloths
and laxly flung limbs, and then his eyes went forward to discover the
open hold piled high with trunks and cases, and aft, to where the little
cabin gaped inexplicably empty. Then he became aware that the planks of
the middle decking were dotted with moving black specks.

His attention was riveted by these specks. They were all walking in
directions radiating from the fallen man in a manner--the image came
unsought to his mind--like the crowd dispersing from a bull-fight.

He became aware of Gerilleau beside him. "Capo," he said, "have you your
glasses? Can you focus as closely as those planks there?"

Gerilleau made an effort, grunted, and handed him the glasses.

There followed a moment of scrutiny. "It's ants," said the Englishman,
and handed the focused field-glasses back to Gerilleau.

His impression of them was of a crowd of large black ants, very like
ordinary ants except for size, and for the fact some of the larger of
them bore a sort of clothing of grey. But at the time his inspection was
too brief for particulars. The head of Lieutenant da Cunha appeared over
the side of the cuberta, and a brief colloquy ensued.

"You must go aboard," said Gerilleau.

The lieutenant objected that the boat was full of ants.

"You have your boots," said Gerilleau.

The lieutenant changed the subject. "How did these men die?" he asked.

Captain Gerilleau embarked upon speculation that Holroyd could not
follow, and the two men disputed with a certain vehemence. Holroyd took
up the field-glass and resumed his scrutiny, first of ants and then of
the dead man amidships.

He has described these ants to me very particularly.

He says they were as large as any ants he has ever seen, black and
moving with a steady deliberation very different from the mechanical
fussiness of the common ant. About one in twenty was much larger than
it's fellows, and with an exceptionally large head. These reminded him
at once of the master workers who are said to rule over the leaf-cutter
ants; like them they seemed to be directing and co-ordinating the
general movements. They tilted their bodies back in a manner altogether
singular, as if they made some use of the fore feet. And he had a
curious fancy, that he was too far off to verify, that most of these
ants of both kinds were wearing accoutrements, had things strapped about
their bodies by bright white bands like white metal threads...

He put down the glasses abruptly, realising that the question of
discipline between the captain and his subordinate had become acute.

"It is your duty," said the captain, "to go aboard. It is my
instructions."

The lieutenant seemed on the verge of refusing. The head of one of the
mulatto sailors appeared beside him.

"I believe these men were killed by ants," said Holroyd abruptly in
English.

The captain burst into rage. He made no answer to Holroyd. "I have
commanded you to go aboard," he screamed to his subordinate in
Portuguese. "If you do not go aboard forthwith it is mutiny--rank
mutiny. Mutiny and cowardice! Where is the courage that should animate
us? I will have you in irons, I will have you shot like a dog." He began
a torrent of abuse and curses, he danced to and fro. He shook his fists,
he behaved as if beside himself with rage, and the lieutenant, white and
still, stood looking at him. The crew appeared forward, with amazed
faces.

Suddenly, in a pause of this outbreak, the lieutenant came to some
heroic decision, saluted, drew himself together and clambered upon the
deck of the cuberta.

"Ah!" said Gerilleau, and his mouth shut like a trap. Holroyd saw the
ants retreating before da Cunha's boots. The Portuguese walked slowly to
the fallen man, stooped down, hesitated, clutched his coat and turned
him over. A black swarm of ants rushed out of the clothes, and da Cunha
stepped back very quickly and trod two or three times on the deck.

Holroyd put up the glasses. He saw the scattered ants about the
invader's feet, and doing what he had never seen ants doing before. They
had nothing of the blind movements of the common ant; they were looking
at him--as a rallying crowd of men might look at some gigantic monster
that had dispersed it.

"How did he die?" the captain shouted.

Holroyd understood the Portuguese to say the body was too much eaten to
tell.

"What is there forward?" asked Gerilleau.

The lieutenant walked a few paces, and began his answer in Portuguese.
He stopped abruptly and beat off something from his leg. He made some
peculiar steps as if he was trying to stamp on something invisible, and
went quickly towards the side. Then he controlled himself, turned about,
walked deliberately forward to the hold, clambered up to the fore
decking, from which the sweeps are worked, stooped for a time over the
second man, groaned audibly, and made his way back and aft to the cabin;
moving very rigidly. He turned and began a conversation with his
captain, cold and respectful in tone on either side, contrasting vividly
with the wrath and insult of a few moments before. Holroyd gathered only
fragments of it's purport.

He reverted to the field-glass, and was surprised to find the ants had
vanished from all exposed surfaces of the deck. He turned towards the
shadow beneath the decking, and it seemed to him they were full of
watching eyes.

The cuberta, it was agreed, was derelict, but too full of ants to put
men aboard to sit and sleep: it must be towed. The lieutenant went
forward to take in and adjust the cable, and the men in the boat stood
up to be ready to help him. Holroyd's glasses searched the canoe.

He became more and more impressed by the fact that a great if minute and
furtive activity was going on. He perceived that a number of gigantic
ants--they seemed nearly a couple of inches in length--carrying
oddly-shaped burthens for which he could imagine no use--were moving in
rushes from one point of obscurity to another. They did not move in
columns across the exposed places, but in open, spaced-out lines, oddly
suggestive of the rushes of modern infantry advancing under fire. A
number were taking cover under the dead man's clothes, and a perfect
swarm was gathering along the side over which da Cunha must presently
go.

He did not see them actually rush for the lieutenant as he returned, but
he has no doubt they did make a concerted rush. Suddenly the lieutenant
was shouting and cursing and beating at his legs. "I'm stung!" he
shouted, with a face of hate and accusation towards Gerilleau.

Then he vanished over the side, dropped into his boat, and plunged at
once into the water. Holroyd heard the splash.

The three men in the boat pulled him out and brought him aboard, and
that night he died.


3.

Holroyd and the captain came out of the cabin in which the swollen
and contorted body of the lieutenant lay, and stood together at the
stern of the monitor, staring at the sinister vessel they trailed behind
them. It was a close, dark night that had only phantom flickers of sheet
lightning to illuminate it. The cuberta, a vague black triangle, rocked
about in the steamer's wake, her sails bobbing and flapping, and the
black smoke from the funnels, spark-lit ever and again, streamed over
her swaying masts.

Gerilleau's mind was inclined to run on the unkind things the lieutenant
had said in the heat of his last fever.

"He says I murdered 'im," he protested. "It is simply absurd. Someone 'ad
to go aboard. Are we to run away from these confounded ants whenever
they show up?"

Holroyd said nothing. He was thinking of a disciplined rush of little
black shapes across bare sunlit planking.

"It was his place to go," harped Gerilleau. "He died in the execution of
his duty. What has he to complain of? Murdered...! But the poor fellow
was--what is it--? Demented. He was not in his right mind. The poison
swelled him... U'm."

They came to a long silence.

"We will sink that canoe--burn it."

"And then?"

The inquiry irritated Gerilleau. His shoulders went up, his hands flew
out at right angles from his body. "What is one to do?" he said, his
voice going up to an angry squeak.

"Anyhow," he broke out vindictively, "every ant in dat cuberta--! I will
burn dem alive!"

Holroyd was not moved to conversation. A distant ululation of howling
monkeys filled the sultry night with foreboding sounds, and as the
gunboat drew near the black mysterious banks this was reinforced by a
depressing clamour of frogs.

"What is one to do?" the captain repeated after a vast interval, and
suddenly becoming active and savage and blasphemous, decided to burn the
Santa Rosa without further delay. Everyone aboard was pleased by that
idea, everyone helped with zest; they pulled in the cable, cut it, and
dropped the boat and fired her with tow and kerosene, and soon the
cuberta was crackling and flaring merrily amidst the immensities of the
tropical night. Holroyd watched the mounting yellow flare against the
blackness, and the livid flashes of sheet lightning that came and went
above the forest summits, throwing them into momentary silhouette, and
his stoker stood behind him watching also.

The stoker was stirred to the depths of his linguistics. "Sauba go pop,
pop," he said. "Wahaw!" and laughed richly.

But Holroyd was thinking that these little creatures on the decked canoe
had also eyes and brains.

The whole thing impressed him as incredibly foolish and wrong, but--what
was one to do? This question came back enormously reinforced on the
morrow, when at last the gunboat reached Badama.

This place, with its leaf-thatch-covered houses and sheds, its
creeper-invaded sugar-mill, its little jetty of timber and canes, was
very still in the morning heat, and showed never a sign of living men.
Whatever ants there were at that distance were too small to see.

"All the people have gone," said Gerilleau, "but we will do one thing
anyhow. We will 'oot and vissel."

So Holroyd hooted and whistled.

Then the captain fell into a doubting fit of the worst kind. "Dere is
one thing we can do," he said presently.

"What's that?" said Holroyd.

"'Oot and vissel again."

So they did.

The captain walked his deck and gesticulated to himself. He seemed to
have many things on his mind. Fragments of speeches came from his lips.
He appeared to be addressing some imaginary public tribunal either in
Spanish or Portuguese. Holroyd's improving ear detected something about
ammunition. He came out of these preoccupations suddenly into English.
"My dear 'Olroyd!" he cried, and broke off with "But what can one do?"

They took the boat and field-glasses, and went close in to examine the
place. They made out a number of big ants, whose still postures had a
certain effect of watching them, dotted about the edge of the rude
embarkation jetty. Gerilleau tried ineffectual pistol shots at these.
Holroyd thinks he distinguished curious earthworks running between the
nearer houses, that may have been the work of insect conquerors of those
human habitations. The explorers pulled past the jetty, and became aware
of a human skeleton wearing a loin cloth, and very bright and clean and
shining, lying beyond. They came to a pause regarding this...

"I 'ave all dose lives to consider," said Gerilleau suddenly.

Holroyd turned and stared at the captain, realising slowly that he
referred to the unappetising mixture of races that constituted his crew.

"To send a landing party--it is impossible--impossible. They will be
poisoned, they will swell, they will swell up and abuse me and die. It
is totally impossible... If we land, I must land alone, alone in thick
boots and with my life in my hand. Perhaps I should live. Or again--I
might not land. I do not know. I do not know."

Holroyd thought he did, but he said nothing.

"De whole thing," said Gerilleau suddenly, "'as been got up to make me
ridiculous. De whole thing!"

They paddled about and regarded the clean white skeleton from various
points of view, and then they returned to the gunboat. Then Gerilleau's
indecisions became terrible. Steam was got up, and in the afternoon the
monitor went on up the river with an air of going to ask somebody
something, and by sunset came back again, and anchored. A thunderstorm
gathered and broke furiously, and then the night became beautifully cool
and quiet and everyone slept on deck. Except Gerilleau, who tossed about
and muttered. In the dawn he awakened Holroyd.

"Lord!" said Holroyd, "what now?"

"I have decided," said the captain.

"What--to land?" said Holroyd, sitting up brightly.

"No!" said the captain, and was for a time very reserved. "I have
decided," he repeated, and Holroyd manifested symptoms of impatience.

"Well--yes," said the captain. "I shall fire de big gun!"

And he did! Heaven knows what the ants thought of it, but he did. He
fired it twice with great sternness and ceremony. All the crew had
wadding in their ears, and there was effect of going into action about
the whole affair, and first hit and wrecked the old sugar-mill, and then
they smashed the abandoned store behind the jetty. And then Gerilleau
experienced the inevitable reaction.

"It is no good," he said to Holroyd; "no good at all. No sort of bally
good. We must go back--for instructions. Dere will be de devil of a row
about dis ammunition--oh! De devil of a row! You don't know, 'Olroyd..."

He stood regarding the world in infinite perplexity for a space.

"But what else was there to do?" he cried.

In the afternoon the monitor started down stream again, and in the
evening a landing party took the body of the lieutenant and buried it on
the bank upon which the new ants have so far not appeared...


4.

I heard this story in a fragmentary state from Holroyd not three
weeks ago. These new ants have got into his brain, and he has come back
to England with the idea, as he says, of "exciting people" about them
"before it is too late." He says they threaten British Guiana, which
cannot be much over a trifle of a thousand miles from their present
sphere of activity, and that the Colonial Office ought to get to work
upon them at once. He declaims with great passion: "These are
intelligent ants. Just think what that means!"

There can be no doubt they are a serious pest, and that the Brazilian
Government is well advised in offering a prize of five hundred pounds
for some effectual method of extirpation. It is certain too, that since
they first appeared in the hills beyond Badama, about three years ago,
they have achieved extraordinary conquests. The whole of the south bank
of the Batemo River, for nearly sixty miles, they have in their
effectual occupation; they have driven men out completely, occupied
plantations and settlements, and boarded and captured at least one ship.
It is even said they have in some inexplicable way bridged the very
considerable Capuarana arm and pushed many miles towards the Amazon
itself. There can be little doubt that they are far more reasonable and
with a far better social organisation then any previously known ant
species; instead of being dispersed societies they are organised into
what is in effect a single nation; but their peculiar and immediate
formidableness lies not so much in this as in the intelligent use they
make of poison against their enemies. It would seem this poison of
theirs is closely akin to snake poison, and it is highly probable they
actually manufacture it, and that the larger individuals among them
carry the needle-like crystals of it in their attacks upon men.

Of course it is extremely difficult to get any detailed information
about these new competitors for sovereignty of the globe. No
eye-witnesses of their activity, except for such glimpses as Holroyd's,
have survived the encounter. The most extraordinary legends of their
prowess and capacity are in circulation in the region of the Upper
Amazon, and grow daily as the steady advance of the invader stimulates
men's imaginations through their fears. These strange little creatures
are credited not only with the use of implements and knowledge of fire
and metals and with organised feats of engineering that stagger our
Northern minds--used as we are to such feats as that of the Saubas of
Rio de Janeiro, who, in 1841, drove a tunnel under Parahyba, where it is
as wide as the Thames at London Bridge--but with an organised and
detailed method of record and communication analogous to our books. So
far their action has been a steady progressive settlement, involving the
flight or slaughter of every human being in the new areas they invade.
They are increasing rapidly in numbers, and Holroyd at least is firmly
convinced that they will finally dispossess man over the whole of
tropical South America.

And why should they stop at tropical South America?

Well, there they are, anyhow. By 1911 or thereabouts, if they go on as
they are going, they ought to strike the Capuarana Extension Railway,
and force themselves upon the attention of the European capitalist.

By 1920 they will be halfway down the Amazon. I fix 1950 or '60 at least
for the discovery of Europe.